here's the most important question
people ask me this question all the time
they say Steve what is your favorite
ever episode on the DI ofo podcast and I
think the more important question is
actually what is your favorite episode
on the DI of AO podcast of all time and
so I went out to try and answer that
question what is your favorite episode
what is your favorite moment on this
podcast of all time and using a data
scientist and a big team of analysts
we've found the most replayed moments of
all the hundreds of episodes we've
produced this year to show to you today
these are the moments that you replayed
and shared more than any other moment on
this podcast
theoretically this should be the most
valuable D of a CEO episode you ever
listen to because it's a compation of
the most valuable moments that we've
ever had on this show in 2020
[Music]
three the seventh most replayed moment
is my conversation with jles yo where he
takes on some of the biggest myths about
Health weight obesity and he answers the
question do we have to get fatter as we
age is it genetic what are the easy ways
to manage our weight after I read it in
your book about us gaining more and more
weight his we age I Googled it and the
healthcare research and quality agency
said that we naturally tend to gain
weight as we age to the tune of 1 to2
pounds per year according to their
review and that's from the agency for
healthare research and quality which I
found quite startling but but completely
accurate so the numbers so what what the
numbers that we have is yeah I think
that's right actually so between 20 and
50 years old those 30 years intervening
the average person average will gain
about 15 kilos in weight which is 32.
yes 2 pound a year one to 2 pound a year
15 kilos in weight is gained over 30
years on average some gain very little
others gain a hell of a lot more we look
at ourselves in a mirror I look at
myself in a mirror um but it's true I
don't want to be that
guy mate I don't know how much choice
you have what can I do to to to try and
stay CU for me it's not really about the
weight thing or how you look it's more
about like
I I am I don't know how to say this but
there was this big set of stairs the
other day really really long set of
stairs leading down to this Lake I was
in Indonesia a couple of months ago um
and I I remember thinking about those
stairs and thinking God if I wasn't you
know athletic and strong and didn't have
good knees and things like that there's
no way I'd be able to get down this long
winding handcarved set of Indonesian
stairs so that I could go on this boat
trip that I was going to go on and I
just thought about how it was a weird
thing I know this is kind of a strange
story to tell but it crossed my mind I
got to the bottom of the stairs and I
turned to the person I was with and was
literally like you know that's why I've
got to stay in shape for as long as I
can because I want to do these boat
trips and I want to go on this little
rafting thing but I won't even be able
to access it unless I can go down up and
down those stairs like 200 meters of
stairs down this Cliff um so that's what
I care about I care about being active
and strong and fit for as long as I
possibly can and I from what you've said
about gravity and weight um being
overweight is going to inhibit my
chances of being able to do those stairs
so so that I think there are two
elements there first of all there is
doing the things that we want to do okay
like that because you're exactly right
these are the things which I can still
do that I can still walk up a mountain
or down a mountain because I'm still fit
enough to do that and I want to stay as
fit as long as I can to do that and
weight will inhibit that undoubtedly but
then there's a second element to
actually consider now that's healthy
look none of us are going to live longer
we
hopefully and anyway if we left lived
longer but was unhealthy would you want
to live longer so you want to live
longer but healthier for longer okay and
undoubtedly the thing that is closest
related to health when you age is not
your total weight there's a role to play
there the amount of muscle you have it
is your muscle mass as you age
independent of how much fat you have
okay that will determine how healthy you
are as you age so as so now the moment
now I'm talking about going into the 60s
and the the 70s rather than when one is
able to go down a 200 me set of steps
okay so now as you get older the most
crucial bit of information is to
maintain resistance training not lifting
and that's not what I'm talking about
sitting on a wall getting up and down a
chair because that the amount of muscle
mass you have really really really marks
the level of Health that that you're
going to get and then the the signs is
startling it is so so so related
independent of independent of weight you
know from from from the so muscle mass
is the most important for healthy aging
the moment you get 60 70 plus
interesting okay so I'll keep I'll keep
doing resistance training correct always
keep resistance training and lifting
weights as long as I can lifting weights
as long as you can at some point you
won't be able to lift weights just don't
don't write me off don't write me off
John the hubis of Youth yeah that's the
naivity of Youth yeah you just assume
you'll always be able to do what you can
do now I I yeah it's something I think a
lot about and I think a lot of people
will watch this podcast
because probably especially this time of
year we're in January they'll probably
be trying to find ways that they can cut
fat they want to be a bit skinnier you
said think you said half a stone you
want to lose I'm in the same place I
think most people want to lose a half a
stone or something what is the way that
you would suggest to do that the simple
way you know not the like
complicated go by this guy's course and
do three million sit-ups whatever the
simple advice you would give someone
that's H hoping to create sort of
sustainable weight loss so the first is
the amount of protein you eat and you
need to try and focus on trying to keep
to about 16% of the energy in your day
okay from protein 16% and there's a
sweet spot so if you eat too much and
you're not lifting you're stressing your
kidneys because your kidneys have to get
rid of the nitrogen from the protein
okay so 16% is a sweet spot and it
doesn't mean steaks only it can mean
beans tofu any kind of protein from from
anywhere 16 % second is fiber we need to
eat as much fiber as physically possible
okay 30 gr we want to aim for although
we're looking at the moment on average
in this country we're probably only
eating 15 grams we need to double the
amount of fiber we actually eat third we
need to limit the amount of added sugars
into our diet added sugars meaning
sugars not tied up in fiber powdered
stuff uh uh um maple syrup alav nectar
all those are added sugars you put in
keep it to 5% or less of the of the
energy content in your day and those are
the three numbers that that that I want
you to think about so 16% of protein 30
gram of fiber 5% or less of added sugars
apply that to whatever you want what
keto um whatever you want to do apply
that and I think that will be a
sustainable healthy way to eat the sixth
most replayed moment is a conversation I
had with Dr Mindy pels who talks about
the belly fat burning diet nutrition is
a huge thing at this time of year and so
she lays out exactly how to eat and
behave in order to reduce belly fat and
to improve your overall health you told
me about the first two styles of fasting
the first one was intim fasting which is
12 to 16 hours which is good for weight
loss brain fog that kind of thing the
second is autography autophagy what did
I say autography but I like it I said
autophagy I said autophagy we can play
that back I definitely said autophagy
and if I didn't we'll fix it with AI um
autophagy fasting which is 17 to 72
hours good for balancing sex hormones
and preventing illness yeah number three
we haven't spoken about gut reset fast
yeah what's that yeah so that's based
off uh a study that came out of MIT that
showed 24 hours without food and your
intestinal stem cells inside your gut
actually start to reboot themselves now
a stem cell is a cell that can go to
anywhere in the body and repair itself
but at 24 hours you get a plethora of
them in your gut and in the gut we've
got a damaged microbiome from everything
that we've just been talking about so
what I discovered in this 24-hour fast
is I could take women that had been on
birth control pill for years um people
that had been on multiple rounds of
antibiotics people who had been eating
horrible food and I could actually put
them through a 24-hour fast once a week
once every every couple of weeks and
these stem cells would come in there and
they would start to repair and so now if
I teach that person How to Eat Right
their food is actually starting to build
a better microbiome in the gut so that
24-hour fast became this go-to in my
clinic where I could take all these gut
challenges and I could start to unwind
them just because I knew the body had
this capability of making these
intestinal stem cells and it was crazy
like we got people off supp ments we got
people that were didn't weren't making
serotonin which affects moods comes from
the gut all of a sudden start to become
happier people who hadn't had bowel
movements in like three days all of a
sudden we started to put in these this
gut reset and it was like a miracle it
was incredible number four fat burner
fast so the fat burner fast is probably
my favorite for those people who want to
lose weight the research was done that
36 hours without food followed by 12
hours of eating and then another 30 they
actually did it over a 30-day period but
we've been using it in our community
just dosing it in that at 36 hours what
happens is that's enough time where the
blood sugars come come down where all of
a sudden the body it's so smart it goes
okay blood sugar is not common we've
been in this fasted State we've
triggered autophagy we've brought
inflammation down we've made you ketones
we're trying to go find food but this
extra weight it's not not serving you
you cuz remember you got to go find food
so it drops weight and it's the most
beautiful way to get a person to unstick
any kind of weight loss resistance but
most importantly you know where it it
dropped the most amount of weight from
where does everybody want to lose weight
belly yep so it is the I probably should
have called it the fat burning belly fat
burning the belly fat yeah that would
have banged yeah but yeah and so that's
what they showed is that actually a 36
hour fast started to unstick weight loss
and it was started with weight around
the
belly
compelling number five the dopamine
reset fast yeah so number five um I
found some research showing that when
people go without food for 48 hours the
whole dopamine system will be rebooted
so what's important to know about the
dopamine system is it is our molecule of
happiness it is the thing that it's
actually a motivation molecule and it's
a neurotransmitter that allows thoughts
happy thoughts to go across from neuron
to neuron and so what happens and I'm
sure you've talked about this on your
podcast that we're so dopamine saturated
right now but specifically people who
are Overeaters they actually are finding
the study I quote in the book is that
they found that people who had food
addiction people who had extra weight
like obese
situations they were not getting as much
happiness out of their food because
their dopamine receptor sites were
saturated so they had to eat more food
to get more happiness and a lot and you
know food is a state changer it does
make us happy so what they found is if
they put them into a 48 hour fast that
they actually rebooted the whole
dopamine system and new dopamine recept
toyes appeared so that when they brought
food back in to the equation they
actually got more enjoyment out of food
with less food this kind of got me
thinking about a conversation I was
having yesterday with some of my team
here we were talking about how um it
almost feels like sometimes if I've
eaten sugar I can go into a bit of a
sugar cycle and what I mean by that is
I'll have some sugar and then like a
couple of hours later I'll have another
craving for sugar and then a couple of
hours later I'll have another craving
for sugar but then at other times
specifically for example when I did keto
I was I did the keto diet for about
eight month uh eight weeks bloody eight
months I wish um8 weeks and throughout
that period I didn't have any cravings
for sugar yep I we had some chocolate
come into the studio and I walked over
to the chocolate and I smell it Y and I
didn't want any of it y it had gone but
then when I'm in my what I call like the
sugar cycle I'm eating sugar maybe you
know once or twice a day and I'm getting
like the craving for it where which I
just can't seem to resist yep well
dopamine's the molecule of more it's not
the molecule of enough so what it does
is when you get sugar you get this
dopamine rush and the Brain goes woo
love that give me more of that and so
you con you it's it's endless you will
never be fully satisfied it constantly
wants you to come back for more and more
and more so when you start to go off the
ketogenic Energy System you're getting
the same Euphoria you probably felt the
same high the the same mental Clarity
but you've totally taken this molecule
more out of the out of the picture it's
it in fact dopamine will actually you
know you you get those receptor sites
that will be repaired but you're not
getting a big dopamine buzz when you're
in a ketogenic State you're getting
ketones I was I was mulling it with my
team how long I had to stay away from
sugar to kind of get out of that vicious
give me more cycle yeah my experience
has been it's about three days three
days that's what I thought yeah I think
I said four or five but it's just from
experience as well if I haven't had
sugar for three or four days I mean like
a like a chocolate but something
significant in terms of sugar then after
3 or 4 days the craving for it seems to
to vanish yeah yeah it's not it's not if
you think about that it's not hard if
you're trying to overcome a sugar
addiction yeah like just bear it for 3
days and then that dopamine stops
barking at you and then if you attack
fasting onto it now you're getting
ketones and so you're not needing that
as much ketones kill hunger and they
make you so mentally mentally clear they
give you this euphoric feeling so you
don't have that urge to go for the for
the sugar and the ketones come from
fasting which is when your body switches
metabolic State yeah the last and final
fasting style immune reset fast yeah so
immune reset was built off of Dr wter
Longo's work and he did a study on
people who had cancer and were going
through chemotherapy and one of the
challenges we know about chemotherapy is
that it wipes out the whole immune
system and so he wanted to see well what
if I put somebody in a fasted State as
they went through chemotherapy would
there be a difference and what he found
is after 3 days of fasting the white
blood cells in our system actually
reboot themselves so what they do is all
old white blood cells are are sloughed
away and new white blood cells emerge so
people were able to come out of that
chemotherapy experience and have a
stronger immune system as opposed to
what we were seeing was that it was
wiping the immune system out so that
launched the whole three-day water fast
sort of craze at least here in America
we're seeing a lot of people that are
just going after 3-day water fast to
Prime their immune system but you also
also at three days get stem cells full
systemic stem cells so all of a sudden
your body's got in surging with stem
cells going to all parts of the body
repairing it the great example I always
use on this one was I had an Achilles
tendon injury and nothing was nothing
was helping it so I threw a 5-day water
fast at it on the fourth day I felt this
buzz in my achilles tendon and I was
like oh wonder what that is
and it stayed all the way through I went
five full days and um about the fifth
and sixth day so sixth day I was
entering food back in all the pain
completely went away and it never came
back I tried everything I tried
everything and that was the only thing
that repaired
it it does make again evolutionary sense
that if our body senses we're injured
because we're not eating or you know
some other signal that we are
on a course to not survive to put it
nicely it does make sense that it might
set about to repair whatever needs to be
repaired you're getting it you know cuz
like if I was a wounded human back in on
the savanas of I don't know Africa or
wherever we came from um and I'm laid
there and I'm not eating my body should
probably go okay Steve might need
something fixed so that he can get back
to yeah hunting so you're getting it so
survival that that is the number one
priority of the body so when you go
without food you amplify every resource
it has to keep you alive and if
repairing my achilles means I can now go
hunt for food it's going to do that it's
going to make me stronger and I in the
book I I stumbled when I was writing the
book I stumbled upon a really cool
hypothesis that's called the Thrifty
Gene hypothesis and it said that what
it's a theory obviously it's hypoth
hthis it's a theory that the people the
humans that evolved out of the Primal
days had a very specific genotype and
this genotype allowed us to
metabolically flex and and be stronger
in a fasted State because we had to
survive and the people that didn't make
it from that time period didn't have
that Gene but think about this for this
moment so they think we all have this
Gene inside of us right now this Thrifty
Gene where we can go long periods
without food and we can survive so what
happens when we're eating all day what
happens when we're ignoring and we're
not actually activating that genetic
profile so what they are now believing
is that diabetes metabolic syndrome all
of that is largely happening because we
are going against the G the genetic
profile that we are now seeing in humans
we're like on the opposite end of the
spectrum we're overloading our bodies
yeah
which is meaning that the survival Gene
you referen there is not being activated
to help us that's right that's right
interesting the fifth most replayed
moment is a moment from my conversation
with Matthew Walker who is the world's
number one expert on the subject of
sleep he explains the importance of
sleep on our overall health on our
weights and everything in between but
most importantly of all he gives us a
road map for how to sleep better and I
know so many of you are struggling so
I'm not surprised that this is one of
the most replayed moments of the dire of
a CEO of 2023 had a lot of Health
experts on this podcast recently but
none of them have really talk to me
about the role that sleep or sleep
deprivation plays
in
wait is there a
relationship it's probably one of the
most well defined relationships that we
know in all of sleep
science and it is at least a three-part
story so the first Emer evidence came in
terms of um hormones so there are what
we call appetite regulating hormones and
the two principle ones of concern here
are something called leptin and gin now
leptin when it's released will signal to
your brain that you're satisfied with
your food you are satiated and you are
no longer hungry grin does the opposite
when grin is released it says no you're
not satisfied with your food you are not
full you still want to eat more you are
still hungry and some of the first the
they started to uh just limit people
restrict people's sleep to 6 hours or 5
hours or 4 hours and what they found was
that um there
was firstly that signal leptin that says
no you're satisfied with your food you
don't want to eat anymore you're full
that signal of fullness satiation was
decreased by 18%
if that wasn't bad enough grin which is
the hunger hormone that Leed up by
28% overall hunger levels Rose by about
uh
26% so firstly you are it's almost like
double jeopardy that you are getting
punished twice for the same crime of not
sleeping enough once by losing the
signal of I'm full I I don't want to eat
anymore and once again for the no I'm
much more hungry and I'm just going to
overeat which is
gring so what that produces is a profile
of increased eating so on average
underslept individuals started to eat in
those studies about 3 to
400 extra calories at each sit at each
sitting by way of insufficient
sleep then what they discovered is that
it's not just that you want to eat more
it's what it is that you have a craving
for when you are
underslept and this is the problem what
they found is that when you're
underslept you eat more of everything
but you especially eat more of these
heavy-hitting stodgy carbohydrates bread
pasta
pizza the the next thing that you
started to eat have a preference for was
simple sugary Foods sweets and chocolate
and then finally you started to Crave
very salty food and high sodium food
intake will increase your blood
pressure so that was the first of the
the three mechanisms then we did a study
where we said perhaps it's not just the
circulating hormones in the body the
brain is the ultimate Arbiter of your
food decisions so what's going on in the
brain so we took a group of perfectly
healthy individuals and we put them
through the experiment twice once when
they'd had a full 8 hours of sleep and
once when we deprived them of sleep and
then the next day we place them inside
an MRI scanner and we showed them images
of lots of different foods that range
from being sort of you know very healthy
to being very unhealthy and of ice cream
and you know chocolate and pizza and
things to Leafy salads and nuts and
greens and vegetables and we asked them
to rate how much they wanted that food
for each item now we did something a bit
sort of dedly to make it more
ecologically correct so that they
weren't just saying okay they probably
think I should probably say that's how
healthy we said we're going to randomly
select one of these images these food
images that you see and after you get
out the brain scanner we're going to
give you that food and we're going to
politely ask you to eat it all so it
made it a bit more realistic so the
choices were more you know as much as
that we could so what we found is that
when they were sleep deprived the Deep
honic centers the emotional centers of
the brain these desire centers these
reward centers um they ramped up in
their activity in response these highly
desirable highly unhealthy Foods so
these more basic sort of you know
gutteral parts of the brain as it were
um these reward centers were lighting up
much more strongly when you sleep
deprived were still the impulse control
regions in the front of the brain what
we call the prefrontal cortex they were
shut down they were taken offline so as
a consequence you lost your impulse
control and that's why you start to then
say you know when I'm sleep deprived at
the food sort of buffet I'm not I'm not
going to do salad I'm just gonna that
pizza looks awful good or that Pastor
with the cre I'm just going to go into
that all go so so your it's what we call
a pattern in terms of brain activity uh
in Neuroscience of honic eating that
your brain goes into this honic desire
profile so now we understood it's not
just hormones in the body it's also
changes in the brain then came the
finding that there's another chemical in
the body that's
responsible and this comes on to
cannabis when people
um when people when people that you may
know have smoked cannabis they'll often
say I get viciously hungry I get the
munchies I get really hungry that's no
coincidence because cannabis will
stimulate appetite now we all have
naturally occurring cannabis compounds
in our brain brain and our bodies they
are called endoc canabo Endo meaning
comes from insiders um whereas the
Cannabis that comes externally when you
sort of smoke it or um take
Edibles
so Endo canabo do many things for the
brain and the body but one of the things
that they do is control your appetite
and your hunger and what we found is
that when you sleep deprived individuals
these naturally occurring endoc canabo
rocketed up by over 20 % cranking up
people's
appetite and so these three ways lead
you to start packing on you know when
insufficient sleep is occurring when
sleep gets short your waistline
typically starts to expand and we Now
understand the reasons if that wasn't
bad enough it is bad enough the yeah can
you just stop M honestly I'm really uh
the the last thing that we discovered is
that let's say that you're trying to be
really careful and you're trying to diet
and you're trying to lose
weight if you're not getting sufficient
sleep then 60% of all of the weight that
you lose will come from lean muscle mass
oh God no and not fat not the muscle I
know exactly so in other words when you
are dieting but you are underslept you
lose what you want to keep which is
muscle and you keep what you want to
lose which is fat
so again it's I'm sold not an ideal
situation sleep is important I get it
I'm sold how do I my question is what
are the things that in the modern
society are standing in the way of sleep
we've touched on some of them Loosely
but some of the like big obvious things
the things that you would suggest doing
very actionable things we could do
straight away to improve our chances of
having that healthy um deep sleep that
we need to be um optimal in every regard
of our health and performance there's
probably I think five standard tips what
we call sort of sleep hygiene that you
can do and then I'll come on to maybe
just some unconventional tips uh that
we've sort of touched on and we've
spoken about many of these the first
thing I would recommend people to do and
this is why when some people say oh what
about this new sleep supplement or you
know it's it's 40 quid for this bottle
of these sleep new sleep natural
medications I'm going to give it a try I
would say try these tried and true
things first before you spend your money
on supplements the first thing is
regularity go to bed at the same time
and wake up at the same time no matter
whether it's the weekday or the weekend
your brain expects regularity it thrives
best under conditions of regularity when
you give it regularity you can improve
the quantity and the quantity of your
sleep the second thing is get some
Darkness at night as I said we don't get
enough darkness in the modern world
and so the trick I would offer and I
don't use it I don't like the word hack
but the suggestion would be in the last
hour before bed try this experiment for
everyone listening for the next week dim
down half of the lights or switch off
half of the lights or even a 34s of the
lights in your home in the last hour
before bed all of the lights in every
room in all of the rooms you know switch
off almost all of the light now I'm not
suggesting be unsafe and walk around in
the darkness in the last hour that's not
what I want to saying just dim down you
know switch off half of the lights you
will be surprised at how sleepy that
Darkness will make you feel and it's
also an incredible behavioral
trigger to signal to your brain that it
is time for sleep that darkness is
around me that's the second tip is
Darkness the third T tip is temperature
most people sleep in an ambient bedroom
temperature that is too high and you
need to aim for a bedroom temperature of
about 18 18 and a half degrees celus
around about 65 to 68° Fahrenheit if I'm
I'm probably butchering the the
mathematics there on that but um you
need to get cool now you can wear thick
socks you can have a hot water bottle
that's fine but the ambient needs to be
cold because you need to drop your core
body temperature and your brain
temperature by about 1 de Cel to fall
asleep and stay asleep and it's the
reason that you will always find it
easier to fall asleep in a room that's
too cold and too hot so make your
bedroom cold make it dark like a cave
the the fourth question would be what
we've or fourth suggestion would be Walk
It Out and we've spoken about this the
30 minute rule you know get up do
something different or meditate you know
don't lie in bed awake for too long then
the final two things we've spoken about
well we've spoken about caffeine we
haven't spoken about alcohol but let me
just say as the kind of headline of it
alcohol is not a sleep aid many people
use it as a sleep aid it is not your
friend alcohol again is a sedative so it
knocks you out the second is that it
fragments your sleep so you wake up your
sleep is littered with all of these
small Awakenings most of them you don't
remember because they're too brief but
it makes for miserable lousy quality
sleep and the final thing is that
alcohol is very good at blocking your
REM sleep or your dream sleep which we
know is critical for many other
functions as well so alcohol is not your
friend that's the sort of the final tip
again you know just every if you're with
friends have a glass of red wine just
know okay my sleep's not going to be
great and you know I'm not yeah
I'm whatever it's just you know live
life to of course I'm not saying that
the fourth most replayed moment is a
moment from my conversation with the
world leading neuroscientist the man who
has scanned more brains than anybody
else Dr Daniel aan who is a favorite on
the D CEO and he tells us very very
clearly how to grow a healthier brain I
can change my brain it's the most
exciting lesson that I've learned you're
not stuck I'm not stuck with the brain I
had you're not stuck with the brain you
have you can make it better I can prove
it in fact every day what I've come to
believe you're making your brain better
or you're making it worse let's start
there by what you're doing what things
make the brain worse what are the common
things that most of us do without
thinking that make the brain
worse when my daughter Khloe was in
second grade I went to her classroom and
I wrote 20 things on the board and I
went separate them for me good for your
brain bad for your brain seven year olds
they got 19 out of 20 right so most
people
know the only thing they got wrong was
orange juice they put it in the healthy
category when in fact when is it
rational to unwrap fruit sugar from its
fiber source because it turns toxic in
your body so I'm not a fan of fruit
juice I'm a fan of fruit not fruit juice
what's bad about sugar for the
pro-inflammatory
which what does that mean it makes you
diabetic but I mean as it relates to the
brain why is like orange juice or the
ice cream bad for my brain because it's
ultimately going to give you high blood
sugar levels MH which erode your blood
vessels and you're going to have lower
blood flow to your brain that's bad
thing I mean there's so many things
about it so it's addictive it's proin
inflammatory it makes it more likely
you're going to have diabetes and
obesity so 72% of Americans are
overweight 42% are
obese I've published three studies on
35,000 people as your weight goes up the
actual physical size and function of
your brain goes down that should scare
the fat off anyone I used to be chubby
but when I figured out that connection
I'm like oh no I'm it was that that gave
me the motivation to drop about 25 PBS
and so
sugar is the gateway drug to diabetes
and obesity and so not to
mention
inflammation which is the cause of
depression and dementia so you want to
avoid things that cause low blood flow
caffeine nicotine caffeine caffeine
constricts blood flow to the brain what
does that do to my brain Con well
constricts blood flow so you're going to
get less blood flow and remember I
showed you that progression with
age no you don't want that you want to
do things that increase blood flow to
your brain so exercise genko this one of
the supplements I'm going to give you
eat foods like um beets
oregano Rosemary
cinnamon they increase blood flow while
we're on blood flow 40% of 40y olds have
erectile
dysfunction 70% of 70y olds have
erectile dysfunction what that means if
you have blood flow problems anywhere it
means they're
everywhere and
so like
no and it means either you're too
sedentary you're overweight you're
smoking or having too much
caffeine or using marijuana because
marijuana lowers blood flow to the brain
and so just in that one of the 11 it's
exercise
genko for you not for everybody but for
you hyperbaric oxygen those three things
will make a big difference in blood flow
flow genko genko what is that it's a
supplement what does it do uh increases
blood flow to the brain the prettiest
brains I've ever seen take genko there's
actually a spec study uh they gave uh
people 120 milligrams of genko twice a
day significant Improvement in blood
flow to the
brain and so in one of the supplements
I'm going to give you we have genko I
I've taken it every day for the last 20
years at least and then this is where
the US government got an F for the
pandemic
loneliness accelerates dementia and
brain problems and so when they isolated
us the whole significant increase in
brain problems so get connected to other
people the eye in bright Minds is
inflammation so what increases
inflammation low omega-3 fat fat acid
levels and we are
deficient 93% of the population is
deficient in omega-3 fatty acids
93% so all of us should be either eating
more fish
or taking an omega3 supplement like fish
oil gum disease like who knew like I
wasn't really that good at taking care
of my gums until I started reading the
studies you have gum disease you have
inflammation you're more likely to get
depressed and have dementia the third
most replayed moment is a moment from my
conversation with Gary Breer where he
lays out how you can become a superhuman
strip the fat off your body and get
yourself healthy with free easy simple
exercises that will cost you nothing at
all when I heard the story about Dana
White and I saw he had gone from
respectfully being a man that had a
little bit of weight to to having this
these six-pack abs on Instagram of
course the six-pack isn't the the
outcome it's as you've said it's the
stuff going on inside him that's really
the transformation but what can someone
who's just heard that at home where do
they start with getting extending their
life by triple and getting the so you
know he also started something called a
superhuman protocol and superhuman
protocol is using magnetism oxygen and
light right so the only things that we
really get from Mother Nature the the
the big benefit we get from Mother
Nature is is we get magnetism from the
earth we get oxygen from the air we get
light from the sun the truth is most of
us are not contacting the surface of the
Earth that much anymore so he bought
$150,000 worth of equipment a pmf mat an
oxygen what's called a hypermax oxygen
to do exercise with oxygen therapy and a
red light therapy bed and I had him use
that equipment every single day seven
days a week but if your listeners want
to do it for
free you can take off your shoes and
contact the surface of the Earth and I'm
talking about bare feet on soil dirt
grass sand because earthing and
grounding is a very real thing we
actually discharge into the Earth we
actually human beings build up a charge
do you know that pH the acid alkaline
scale pH stands for potential hydrogen
it's a charge it's a complete fallacy
that you can get alkaline by drinking
alkaline water that's the biggest
marketing myth ever sold to the public
um but you can get alkaline by
contacting the surface of the Earth so
if you don't have 150 Grand which I
don't expect anybody listening to this
podcast to spend 150 Grand but he did I
said you need a MAG you need a pmf mat
so you can be alkaline you need to spend
10 minutes a day breathing um 95% O2
under mild exercise and you need to lay
in a red light therapy bed so in the
absence of the Superhuman protocol you
can become superhuman by contacting the
Earth and by learning to do breath work
let's talk about breath work I spend 8
minutes every day doing a very specific
series of breath work people do not
realize the power of something that is
so accessible so free and so easy to do
right they they want things to be more
complicated but it's not and when I said
the presence of oxygen is the absence of
disease it's absolutely true remember
that every elevated emotional state that
a human being can experience actually
has in its molecular structure oxygen is
a component of that emotion so if you
look at the difference between passion
Elation Joy arousal libido and anger for
example it's usually only one
neurotransmitter and the presence of
oxygen the reason why no human being is
ever woken up laughing is because you
don't have the oxidative state to
experience laughter right out of deep
sleep but can you wake up angry yes
because anger doesn't require oxygen so
every morning contact the surface of the
Earth and then spend eight minutes doing
I do a wimh off style of breath work I
give credit where credits do he's the
father of breath work as far as I'm
concerned so I do three rounds of 30
deep breaths
like obnoxiously deep breaths and I
start by trying to take my belly button
and pull my belly button out towards the
wall imagine there's a string pulling
your belly button towards the wall and
then you you fill from the loes of the
lung to the apex of the lung and then
you exhale and just
relax did God knows what they think
we're doing out there right outside this
podcast they're like a bunch of freaka I
knew it was a cult um KN I knew he was a
cult leader but um so you do three
rounds of 30 breaths on the 30th breath
you exhale and you hold allow the
carbohydrate rep receptor to reset when
you don't feel you can hold anymore you
take a deep breath
in you hold again and you let it out
slow and you start again I would suggest
that you start with three rounds of five
breaths then work to 10 15 20 25 and 30
if you get laded this is a good sign
that the oxygen tension is changing in
your brain if your fingers and toes get
tingly this is a good sign that you're
changing the oxygen tension if you feel
some kind of heat uh temperature change
in your neck these are all Great Signs
you will get to the point where you can
actually hold your breath for two or
three minutes sometimes four minutes
between rounds of breath work um and
then the last thing is to expose
yourself to natural sunlight first thing
in the morning the first 45 minutes of
the day God gives us a very very special
type of light it's called First Light
there's no UVA there's no UVB rays in
this light um so that it's not the
damaging Rays from the Sun it still
generates vitamin D3 it has a positive
effect on cortisol on vitamin D3 first
light is the best way to reset your
circadian rhythm so by contacting the
surface of the Earth doing breath work
and getting first light you can get to
the same place that Dana White did with
150 Grand in equipment what about oxygen
masks cuz I I'll be honest when I read
when I read um about the Dana story I
went on Amazon soon after and I was like
I'm just going to buy an oxygen canister
good idea bad idea um so what you want
to do is um you know you get an oxygen
concentrator which takes 21% oxygen from
which is what the concentration at sea
level it turns it into 95% O2 and it
fills this bag and it can refill this
bag over and over and over again okay I
use one called the hypermax you can see
it on my Instagram and um you turn you
plug it in you turn it on it fills this
bag and then you go in you put an oxygen
mask on and you exercise for 10 minutes
only 10 minutes cycle for 3 minutes uh
Sprint for 30 seconds cycle for 3
minutes Sprint for 30 seconds cycle 3
minutes Sprint 30 seconds and you're
done and what this does is it raises
something called the partial pressure
the the storage of oxygen in your blood
the only two time two-time Nobel Ora
Prize winner in Medicine Dr otter
warberg won both of his Nobel prizes for
his work in exercise with oxygen therapy
you want to be a superum do mild
exercise every day while breathing 95%
O2 it's important that you're exercising
and then after that you move into a red
light therapy bed
photobiomodulation um so you know if you
don't have access to a hypermax oxygen
machine just do the breath work get the
breath in you know exchange the oxygen
tension and the tissues and expose
yourself to First Light what about cold
cold with the plunging so I'm a huge fan
of cold water punching but probably not
for the reasons why you think you know
um I also sit on the board of the NFL um
uh lumni Association athletica as a
health services director you know there
there was a time when we used to think
that putting athletes in cold water
after exercise was good because of its
anti-inflammatory effects we know now
that that's only about 15% of the
benefit the majority of the benefit
comes from something called a cold shock
protein if you really want to be
fascinated Google cold shock proteins
these are reserved proteins that are in
your liver they're dumped into the
bloodstream in effort to save your life
when you put yourself in cold water they
scour the body of free radical oxidation
they increase the rate of protein
synthesis muscle repair they are free
you get them when you put yourself in
cold water um I don't know what the
Celsius conversion is but I use 50° for
3 minutes minimum 6 minutes maximum cold
yes it's it's actually not that cold I
mean you know I see people getting in 37
38 degree water there's no evidence that
I've read that shows that colder is
better you get a peripheral Vaso
constriction so it forces all the oxygen
into the core and up to the brain um and
you you get an activation of something
called Brown fat right um thermogenesis
comes from Brown fat and for the women
that are listening for some reason I
seem to insens snare the women when I
say this
remember that the definition of a
calorie is a measure of heat right I
mean the definition of a calorie is the
amount of energy it takes to raise 1
cubic cimeter of water 1° Centigrade so
if if if a calorie is a measure of heat
then this means that when Heat's leaving
your body calories are leaving your body
so if there is nothing nothing no amount
of exercise hits cardio no type of
cardiovascular or weight training that
comes anywhere close to immersing
yourself in cold water in terms of what
will strip fat off your body fast if you
want to strip fat off your body get in
cold water 3 to six minutes a day that's
fascinating because because the oxygen
rushes to my head that's why it has a
really profound impact on mood that's
why it has a very profound impact on
mood because if you think about it
what's the reason why we need deep sleep
what happens in deep Sleep that's so
special there's a secondary oxygen
transfer we transfer oxygen from the
periphery from the extremities to the
brain remember the brain's a
non-metabolic organ so in other words
it's unlike a muscle if I pick up a
weight wait and start to work out my
muscle my arm my body will send more
blood more amino acids more oxygen to
that muscle because it's working well if
I'm sitting at my computer and I'm
watching reruns of The Simpsons or I'm
sitting in my computer and I'm solving
the most complex joint venture agreement
partnership agreement with all kinds of
mathematical equations my brain gets the
same amount of nutrients same amount of
blood flow same amount of oxygen so it
eats the same meal whether or not it's
in a dead Sprint or whether or not it's
just chilling on the couch except
in deep sleep and when you're in cold
water because it's forcing the oxygen up
to the brain the second most replayed
moment is a moment from my conversation
with Dr Tim Spectre a favorite on the
Diary of a CEO and here he talks about
health more holistically and some of the
biggest myths that most of us believe
that are currently standing in our way
we've got a fitness group among some of
my friends there's about 10 of us in it
and um we've been tracking how often we
work out and how frequently work out and
the workouts that we do and one of the
things I have to say is pretty much no
one in the group has lost any weight
we've been doing this for a
year and uh that kind of bucks what you
would think so the only time that I lost
weight was actually when I went on the
keto keto diet I went from 14 Stone 8 to
13 stone 8 in roughly in several weeks
but exercise and exercising for almost
religiously for the last two and a half
years doesn't really seem to impact my
weight at all in a you know in the way
that the Fitness Experts might tell me
on Instagram what's your stance on the
role that exercise play plays in weight
loss has very little role in weight loss
all the studies long-term studies show
uh it doesn't help uh weight loss and
it's been grossly exaggerated as an easy
fix for our obesity problem exercise
doesn't help weight loss no all the
studies show that the only caveat to
that is if you have ch ched your diet
improved your diet and you've lost some
weight at maintaining some exercise does
help prevent it going back up again but
as on its own if you don't change your
Dart it's of no use and that's well
known Now by all the Obesity experts and
all the studies does sugar make us fat
is that the
culprit one of the main things that's
contributing to no again that's that's
reductionism you know we the
but the reason the reason exercise
doesn't work it's important to realize
this is because we all know this that
you know you go for a walk build up
Hunger before a meal that's what your
parents told you you know and everything
about exercise is after it your body
slows down your your metabolism slows
down and it tries to
regain the energy that you've lost
that's just our EV Evolution and so
that's why it's a you're not going to
it's great for your health I'm in know I
exercise fantastic for your mood um it's
great for your heart anti-cancer all
kinds of things we should all do it but
absolutely not if your goal is weight
loss you have to do something about
changing your diet and I think that's
that's the big a huge myth particularly
Peto by gyms and uh fitness apps and
everything else and it it is complete
nonsense I read that you um when you
look to studies over 30 years and you
looked at how many studies had been done
on the relationship of exercise and
weight versus things like sugar and
weight there was 12 more 12 times more
studies done on the relationship of
exercise and weight versus sugar and
weight and why why is that why is there
less research done on the
latter um I think that's the influence
of governments and the food companies
and the drink companies so uh a lot of
the excise SI research done in the last
20 years was sponsored by uh large
corporations who wanted to make this
link between
uh exercise and weight loss so that they
could continue to sell sugary Ultra
processed foods and drinks and just say
it's you know childhood obesities
because we've we don't have playgrounds
and we don't uh encourage this and
that's why the Cokes and the Pepsis are
always there at the Olympic sponsoring
Olympic events and associating
themselves with Sport and they gave
hundreds of millions to various
physiology departments Sports
departments nutrition departments to do
research in this area basically it was
very hard to get anyone to do research
into how sugary drinks make you uh gain
weight or cause problems because they
the amount of money for nutrition has
been abysmally poor you know in from
from governments and that's why you know
we the only the first ever study of
ultra processed food in a controlled
trial was only about three years ago and
it's been around for you know 30 40
years so such is the power of that Lobby
that it it doesn't necessarily distort
the research in a sort of you know evil
way but they point it to make sure that
the researchers are working in an area
that they want uh people to work in and
distracting them keeping them away from
talking about sugars or even artificial
sweeteners which in my view are nearly
as bad because they're sort of you know
hidden um and and deflecting us from the
idea that yes giving kids sugary drinks
or even artificial sweet drinks is going
to be bad for them and cause obesity
wait so I'm I've been I've cut my I cut
out sugar drinks about a year ago I
still have the same Brands but I have
the no sugar version oh dear oh
what do you mean oh dear well all the
all the summary of the trials shows that
if you take uh young adult young adults
and kids and they would say on two cans
of you know full sugar sodas and you
change them to the diet version there's
no real difference in in weight or um
metabolic um changes in their blood um
the
you will go to the dentist less so you
don't get as many fillings
but and yet you you should be gaining
300 calories right if you doing two cans
a day so it doesn't work out as it
should do and that's because of the
extra these chemicals are not inert so
the sweeteners in kids they changed
their their brains to give
them they want more Sweetness in their
food okay so it it could reflect your
wish for your your late night milk
chocolate who knows um and it it makes
it very difficult to train kids to have
more bitter Foods or sour Foods if
they've got these artificial sweeteners
in their diet all the time but they've
now shown that all these sweeteners
actually affect your gut microbes so
even Stevia you know these sort of
so-called healthy ones have an effect on
your gut microbes and they're not inert
so we know that sacarin and sucros is
also cause spikes in your blood sugar uh
when I did it you know have a
trace they're not supposed to but they
they actually do things they're not
supposed to so we know very little about
these these products and my view is that
they are harmful probably not as bad as
having the sugar but they are absolutely
not a health drink and we should be
encouraging people to have you know teas
and kombuchas and uh more bitter tasting
interesting flavors and Foods than just
this Ultra sweet uh chemical concoctions
it's this sugar conglomerate that have
been funding much of the research that
points towards um some of the things
you're talking about
there there that's also the conglomerate
that wants us to believe the calories in
calories out approach because if I just
view every all foods as kind of equal
and on this sort of calorie number then
I can drink some of the sugary Fizz
fizzy drinks and some of the processed
foods as long as I keep it within that
sort of calorie deficit I'll be fine and
so are they is that Sugar conglomerate
is the processed food
conglomerate for the calorie model
absolutely they need that right they
absolutely it's vital you know zero
calories or one calorie you know on the
can that's what you see and you know
you're fooling people into thinking this
is a a healthy drink and oh you know if
I used to have full Coke or Pepsi and
now having the diet version I'm getting
300 calories less a day I should lose
weight it's exactly what they've been
doing and they're also desperate to show
that artificial sweeteners
are really healthy and they come down on
anyone who who tries to say that they're
you know could be any way dangerous and
yet they're not obliged to test them so
none of the none of the chemicals added
really go through rigorous testing on
how they affect our gut microbes and
this is
this you know their testing mechanisms
haven't changed in 50 years as you'll
know if you've listened to this podcast
before I'm an investor in a company
called hu I'm on their board and they
sponsor this podcast and I have a very
exciting announcement to make this
product called Daily Greens is one of
the most highly requested products at hu
but it's never been sold in the UK
before
until now it's often difficult to get
all of the greens into our diet that we
need to have a healthy gut microbiome
and a healthy body and with Hues Daily
Greens product with one scoop scoop
every morning a very very delicious
scoop you can get 91 vitamins minerals
and Whole Food sourced nutrients into
your diet the most important Point here
is I genuinely believe it tastes
delicious it's May my favorite heuel
product ever for all the reasons I've
described so if you want access to this
product you can sign up right now the
link is in the description below it
launches in the UK in January because of
the demand I'm pretty sure it's going to
sell out and here is the single most
replayed moment as it relates to health
on the Diary of a CEO of 2023 so the
first thing I came up against because
this was around the time of the
financial crisis was the lack of
understanding of the brain Body
Connection so these high performing
Executives were kind of acting
like their body was just the vehicle
that was moving their brain around from
meeting to meeting and both
disrespecting their their physical
health but also not understanding that
what they were actually really being
paid for was to use their brain and they
weren't creating the best conditions for
that brain to operate in um and I'm
talking about really basic things like
sleep and a good diet and hydration and
not being sedentary managing your stress
Etc so you know this tiny
organ if it's not in an environment that
is giving it the best chance of doing
its job it's not going to and a crack's
going to appear somewhere um and the
first time we really kind of had a big
confrontation with the bank was when
people were dropping dead on the trading
floor of heart
attacks and they asked me to work more
in my capacity as a former medical
doctor to help with the physical stuff
and I said I can't do that if we don't
address the mental and emotional piece
because that's what's causing this and
they just could could not get that what
did you want to do with those people in
a specific and practical sense what if
you could have you know been in charge
of preventing them from dropping dead on
the trading floor where would you have
started the understanding that stress so
everything that you're experiencing
mentally and emotionally that's
challenging and things like a lot of
travel which is challenging for your
body that that raises levels of the
hormone cortisol which comes from your
adrenal glands and that cortisol courses
around your blood through your entire
body and brain and the brain has
receptors for understanding what's going
on in terms of threat to your survival
so in a 24hour cycle depending on your
age and your gender there's a normal
range for cortisol so it can go up and
down like this you know if something
challenging happens we need to adapt and
rise to meet that challenge but when
that level is above the top range all
the time these receptors in your brain
basically think that there's an imminent
threat to your survival so there's this
whole Cascade of
hormones and they basically cortisol
causes inflammation in the body MH so
inflammation of your vascular system
inflammation around your heart and
everything else gut and you know other
things but particularly around that time
we were seeing a lot of heart attacks
caused by stress this was in the absence
of high blood pressure high cholesterol
smoking it was all stress once upon a
time I Googled um because I had a thesis
I Googled is stress contagious MH and it
came up and it said it was
contagious is it contagious in what
circumstances do we need to be aware of
that contagion and more importantly how
and why is it contagious okay I will
tell you the answer to that but I'm
going to ask you a question first have
you ever walked into a room with someone
and by the time you've left that meeting
with them you just feel so
drained okay so yeah you know so you
know the feeling so I'll I'll tell you
how it works physiologically um I'm
going to start with something else to
like build you up to this story so did
you know that women who live together or
work closely together will synchronize
their menstrual periods within two or
three months so whenever I want to
explain something that's complex or I
don't actually know the current
Neuroscience I always take it back to
what happened in ancient times so when
we were living in the cave the men
hunted and gathered and lived quite
nomadically so sometimes they would go
away for months at a time and in those
days the most fundamental important
thing for the survival of the human
species was that the alpha male must
pass on his
genes so if he was going to be away for
months and he couldn't you know that
there weren't men there to defend the
women from predators maybe there was
going to be a spell of the Ice Age and
they would all freeze to death or they
wouldn't have food um he needed to make
sure that at least at least five women
were impregnated with his sperm at the
same time so that if there was a food
shortage or there was like still birth
or miscarriage or whatever at least one
out of five would survive so to be able
to do that they had to be fertile at the
same time so that's why that mechanism
exists now we don't need that mechanism
now but it's still wired into the way
that we operate so those sex steroid
hormones like estrogen and progesterone
they leak out of our sweat about this
far around us and that's why if you're
living with another woman or if you know
you're sitting across the desk every day
then particles of hormone from my sweat
would go into the through the skin of
the other woman if she's within what
distance I mean it's not you wouldn't
have to be sitting next to each other if
you live together that that means you're
interacting enough that it would happen
Okay so particles but not not if you
work together if you work together and
you sit right next to each other every
day then it does happen too
so you know in a a small office that's
got like six girls in it that that the
menstrual synchronization will happen
interestingly it's led by the alpha
female so yeah so you can you can work
out if you don't know already who the
alpha female well if you you know
basically let's say My Cycles don't
change and everyone says oh I've got my
period early or I haven't had my period
yet but now it's started then that would
mean that probably I was the alpha
female how does the body know who the
alpha female is that will be to do with
levels of testosterone why why did the
body why does that matter who the alpha
female is why does it matter that they
sync up with her I I don't I don't know
if it really matters I think it's just a
case of physiology so it's a little bit
like in the um troops of
gorillas the stress levels of the silver
backat gorilla affect the other gorillas
more than gorillas who are peers to each
other so there is we have a natural
hierarchy and it must be related to
survival as well so she was probably the
person who the alpha male was going to
impregnate first probably so everyone
needs to kind of fall in line because
when she starts having sex they need to
be ready yeah okay and also it'll
probably be to do with things like you
know survival genes so it'll be the
people with the hardiest genes because
that's what you'll want to pass on as
well mhm okay makes sense most resilient
okay okay so where were we stressing
contagion done all the hormones and the
menal so basically cortisol is a hormone
that works in that same way so cortisol
is the main stress hormone and this one
doesn't matter if you're male or female
but it does matter where you are in the
hierarchy of the organization as I just
mentioned
so usually in that conversation I
mentioned to you where you go into a
room and you just feel completely
drained afterwards usually the person
that comes out feeling drained is less
senior than the person that's had that
effect on them and that's why this is so
crucial to lead leadership because your
stress levels as a leader as a CEO are
going to have more impact on everybody
else than the rest of the people um put
together basically so managing your
stress is obviously important for you
but it's important in terms of what
happens to other people and the first
issue I came up against was CEOs and
CFOs that said well I won't show them
that I'm stressed I won't I won't tell
them what's happening with the numbers I
won't display emotions in front of them
and I said they're still going to know
physiologically it's going to impact
them so now you really have to do
something about
it um and the other thing about cortisol
which is quite funny well one of the
side effects is quite funny is that as a
survival mechanism it will help you to
store fat around your
abdomen so you know again in the cave if
you were potentially going to like not
find food for a month then if you had
extra fat around your abdomen you could
digest that and survive till you could
find
food so with my clients in financial
services it got to a point where as soon
as I walked into the room they just lift
their t-shirt up and say now you know
how I've been in the last month so
stress causes belly fat belly fat that's
really hard to shift so again what I
would see with people is that they would
say oh I've put on a bit of weight
around the middle you know had to loosen
the belt a bit so I've started eating
less I've started like exercising more
and I still can't shift it and again
that's when I would explain this is the
impact of cortisol as long as you're
still leaking out extra cortisol
nothing's going to change
so and like I said even exercising more
or eating better less or differently
whatever it is wouldn't shift that fat
you had to get to the root cause you had
to reduce the
cortisol for any of you that are still
here I have a bonus moment for you I
often get asked what is my favorite
episode of the dire of a CEO of all time
and I often try and avoid that question
because I don't want to pick one
particular episode it's kind of like
picking your children however because
you've gotten here I'm going to reveal
it to you and I'm going to play you a
moment from that conversation my
favorite ever episode on the dire of a
CEO of all time is episode
101 and it just happens to be the most
shared episode we've ever had of all
time time on WhatsApp and I know that
sounds a little bit obscure but the
interesting thing about WhatsApp is it's
one toone typically so it's typically
one friend sending it to a family member
or to a friend or something like that
and for it to be the most transferred
between one person and another I think
is telling about the value of that
conversation here is one of the most
important moments from my favorite
episode on the Diary of a CEO of all
time to understand what happiness is you
have to understand the cause of it yes
and you write about that extensively and
solve for happy so what is the cause of
unhappiness as you see it especially if
you're building sort of machine learning
applications that are going to you know
um solve you know make people arrive at
contentment or happiness in a
personalized way we must be able to know
what's causing this lack of allow me a
bit of time to explain it because it
it's simple when we get it but it's not
simple to get to it so so happiness is
very predictable okay if you look back
at any point your life where you ever
felt happy there is one commonality
across all of those moments that can
actually be be documented in a
mathematical equation okay you've never
felt happy because of a specific event
in your life okay uh take for example
rain rain doesn't make you happy or
unhappy there is no inherent value of
happiness in Rain okay rain makes you
happy when you want to order your plant
and it makes you unhappy when you want a
sunbath right and so it's not just the
event rain it's the comparison between
the event and an expectation in your
mind of how life should be okay if
you're worried about your plants then
life should be generous to me and get me
rain so I can water the plants and if
life does that then life meets your
expectations and you're happy okay and
so happiness in that sense becomes equal
to or greater than so it's really
mathematics the your perception of the
events of your life minus your
expectations of how life should be
okay and apply that to anything apply
that to anything so you know my favorite
example is nature we're all happy in
nature why are we all happy in nature I
mean you go out there and there are ants
and there are flies and you know trees
are crooked and there are you know
shrubs everywhere and bushes and it's
just really not that hedged and
organized but that's what we expect so
you know Nature's chaos is what we
expect nature to be and so we feel happy
you know nobody ever sits in front of
the ocean and says I like the view but
please mute the sound okay you just take
it you know it's it's the monotonous
sound and the view and the wind and and
the Sun and the whole experience right
uh and because of
that uh happiness becomes very different
than what was defined to us okay what
was defined to us is that happiness is
found in a a gathering at the pub or
party or a you know an activity or some
kind of pleasure or fun or Elation or
whatever that is that's not at all true
these are I call these the state of
Escape okay happiness as per the
definition of the happiness equation is
events equal to or beating expectations
life going my way okay and so basically
happiness is that calm and peacefulness
you feel when you're okay with life as
it is it doesn't really matter what life
is okay what matters is that you can be
okay with it
right so so you take you know the any
example huh if your boss is annoying and
your expectation is yeah bosses are
annoying this is what life is about they
become bosses because they're annoying
right and and so if if that's your
expectation you're going to look at it
and go like yeah I need to learn the
skill of managing annoying bosses okay
and if that's the case then you're not
going to be upset about it uh similarly
anything else if you look at it then
it's not just the event it's your
perception of the event so you have a a
something to influence it's not just the
event huh your partner might say
something hurtful on Friday at 4
p.m. that's the event my partner said
something hurtful at Sunday morning you
tell yourself he or she doesn't love me
anymore okay that's your perception of
the event that's not actually the event
the event is something hurtful was said
but your perception of the event is your
work is your it's your brain adding
color to it and then you compare that to
your expectations right you compared my
boss is annoying to my boss shouldn't be
annoying where did you get that from
right so we blur the happiness equation
we break the happiness equation because
of what I call the six and seven okay
six Grand Illusions and seven blind
spots which are the six Grand Illusions
are
basically uh call them
Pathways uh that the modern world
teaches us to navigate the modern world
that our Illusions are not true okay
take for example control everyone knows
that to succeed in the modern world you
have to learn to control certain events
right so you start to believe that the
way to succeed in life is to control
everything but the truth is even if you
go down to the basics of physics that we
never are in control that the the
absolute design of nature itself of the
universe itself is entropy and Chaos
right that's the actual design and so if
you try to control it you're bound to be
disappointed a lot of events are going
to miss your expectations okay and yes
I'm not saying don't control anything at
all but start to understand that you're
you're going to be selective because you
have a finite amount of effort and by
the way even if you're selective and you
you try to control everything sometimes
things will fall out of control okay and
that should be your expectation once you
get that right that was one that was my
biggest illusion okay I a mathematician
I'm a software developer I am a
physicist I am an engineer and I am a
senior executive that doesn't get worse
than that okay I'm like the worst
absolute the worst I used to give my
wonderful wife I swear to you Stephen
don't judge me I used to give her a
spreadsheet that would tell her when to
wash the colors and when to wash the
whites based on our average consumption
as a family to save the environment and
poor Niel would would actually you smile
at me and say sure baby I will use this
right of course and ignores the hell out
of me because that's how crazy you can
be when it comes to control now these
are the Illusions if you live your life
through the illusion of control good
luck finding happiness so six Grand
Illusions the illusion of uh of thought
the illusion the illusion of self the
illusion of uh knowledge the illusion of
time control and fear okay now that's
one side and that disrupts your your
entire view of what to expect from life
because you're expecting life to behave
through a length of a a lens of an
illusion the other side of it is what I
call Seven blind spots okay and the
Seven blind spots are not really defects
in your brain as a matter of fact they
are the very design of your brain okay
your brain is designed to tell you
what's wrong okay it's not designed to
you know if a Tiger shows up right here
now my brain has no you you whatsoever
in telling me Oh my god look how
Majestic that animal is right yeah it's
a beautiful animal but my brain will say
we're going to die okay and we're going
to die is the idea that basically makes
our uh our brain constantly look for
what's wrong blur the events of life huh
you ask a mother and and she will say oh
my daughter's been sick all winter no
she just had two episodes of flu 3 days
each but to the to the Caring Heart of a
mother that needs to be exaggerated to
the exaggeration is one of the blind
spots your your brain is trying to get
you to take action so it pushes you it
pushes You by exaggerating the event a
little bit so that you jump in and take
action and accordingly the event you're
comparing to you're comparing the wrong
event to the wrong expectation and the
happiness equation falls apart isn't
this cool every single conversation I
have here on the DI of AO at the very
end of it you'll know I ask the guest to
leave a question in the Diary of a CEO
and what we've done is we've turned
every single question written in the
Diary of a CEO into these conversation
cards that you can play at home so
you've got every guest we've ever had
their question their name and on the
back of it if you scan that QR code you
get to watch on your phone the person
who answered that question the next
guest we're finally revealing all of the
question questions and the people that
answered the question and we've just
released the updated conversation cards
we released it the first time and it
sold out instantly we released
conversation cards again and they sold
out instantly for a second time we've
updated the cards put all the new
questions in and we've introduced a
Twist on the back of the conversation
cards now we've got different levels of
vulnerability so level one these are
more sort of surface level questions and
by the time you get down to level three
the questions become a little bit more
challenging a little bit more vulnerable
and that's really where connection
happens to test the power of these cards
we invited 20 total strangers to come
and have dinner and the only thing they
had to do was answer a level three
question that was put in front of them
in a room full of strangers and we saw
unbelievable almost magical results
people teers people forming lifelong
friendships and people unlocking truths
within them that they' been too scared
to confront vulnerability is the door to
connection that is what we've always
done here on this podcast and that's
exactly what these conversation cards do
you can play them with your partner at
home you can play them with your
colleagues at work or you can play them
with your best friend on the weekend the
stories we've heard about these cards
about a grandson playing it with their
grandfather to get to know them pulling
them out in the midst of a divorce with
their wife and saving their marriage as
you've often seen on this podcast
sometimes one question and someone who
is genuinely open to answering it is all
it takes to unlock a truth that will end
up setting you free and that's exactly
why we made these conversation cards and
you can get them right now at the
conversation cards.com I'll put a link
to the conversation cards in the
description below they've sold out twice
instantaneously so if you are interest
in getting hold of some limited edition
conversation cards I really really
recommend acting quickly and let me know
how powerful they were for you and or
for your relationships thank
you do you need a podcast to listen to
next we've discovered that people who
liked this episode also tend to
absolutely love another recent episode
we've done so I've linked that episode
in the description below I know you'll
enjoy it
[Music]
oh